Hey friends. I want to
thank our sponsor. Reagan, are
you struggling to replicate the
bugs and performance issues that
your customers are reporting? Plug
Regan into your web and
mobile applications right now, and
diagnose problems in minutes rather
than hours. Kiss goodbye. Having
to dig through log files
and relying on frustrated users
to report issues, make your
software development life so much
easier. Using Reagan's error, crash,
and performance monitoring tools. Every
software team can create flawless
software experiences for their customers
with Reagan. Try it free
today@raygun.com. That's our a Y
G U n.com. This is
Scott Hanselman, this Hansel minutes
today. I'm talking with Sharon
steel CEO at commuter log
author of empathy at work.
And I first learned about
Sharon when I saw her
Ted X talk. How are
you? I'm great. How are
you doing? I'm very happy
to be talking to you.
We have been digital friends
now for many, many years,
and I've, I've watched you
just kicking butt all over
the internet. And I, I
saw your first year TEDx
talk some years ago, but
you've been thinking about the
space of, of empathy and
building collaborative environments for, for
many years before you kind
of blew up in the
TEDx space. Yeah, yeah, for
sure. I actually got it
started speaking CAC in 2000.
Gosh, fourteens splits been about
five years now. I gave
that TEDx talk in 2016
and I got started speaking
on the advice of a
speech therapist I was seeing
at the time I'm a
person who stutters. And so
I had sort of like
come to the spot where,
you know, I was so
uncomfortable just like talking that
I would avoid social situations.
I would avoid talking to
people and it was, you
know, quite frankly just destroying
my career. And so she
suggested I pursue like public
speaking as a way to
sort of just pace the
fear. And so, you know,
I, of course being me
was like, absolutely not. And
then after she like packed
me off of the ledge
and said, don't worry, it's
not going to kill you.
I said, okay, sure. And
so that's kind of how
the whole thing again, let's
just as a way to
sort of, you know, pace
a fear and see if
I could do it or
not. When you're at a
speech therapist who is talking
to you about how to
adjust this, this, this affecting
situation. And then they say,
Oh, you know what? You
should do international keynote speaker.
That would be a great
idea. Like, what are you,
what are you thinking at
this moment? Well, so here's
the thing, like, it wasn't,
Hey, you should like go
on a plane and you
should fly to, you know,
Sydney and a photog in
front of like a thousand
developers. No, no, no. It
was like, how about you
go and speak to a,
a F fluency's seminar, like
at a graduate college and
just talk to them about
not like your experiences as
a person who stutters. And
so, you know, in my
mind, I mean, I had
spent my entire life and
I'm not kidding, like a
great school, you know, like
high school, college, like of
voiding, you know, these kinds
of situations. And so for
her to sort of Cresent
this idea was just like,
why, like why, what I've
fallen terribly? You know, like
do this thing that has
traumatized me. I don't know
how many times my entire
life. And so just in
my mind, it was just
like, there's no way that
that could even work even,
even a little bit. And
so that's what I was
thinking. And I had no
idea that it was going
to turn into, you know,
the thing that it's turned
into now. No, no, no
clue The idea that that
one would or could take
something that was affecting them
and, and turn it into,
I don't know. Is it
fair to say it's an
asset? I mean, does it
get you recognize? It's like,
Oh yeah, I saw you
like, you're the, you're the
woman who stutters or does
that make it worse? Oh,
no. I actually think it's
made it better. And like,
so in all of my
talks now, like I sort
of talk about my like
poignant, you know, my homelands
along a way like that
have sort of taught me
about communication as a person
who stutters and then just
communication, like as a person
in a world that is
just like increasingly divided. Right?
And so another sort of
high product of speaking has
been actually me is getting
a lot more comfortable talking
about stuttering and stuttering and
general. And I wasn't
expecting that to be the
case. I mean, I thought,
you know, I was always
just going to be uncomfortable
with how I spoke. And
so I didn't know that
there was a way to
sort of speak freely and
at the same time until
I became a public speaker,
When I, and forgive me
if this is a bad
analogy, but let's try this.
When I was diagnosed type
one diabetic, I didn't know
anything about the situation. And
I went and I was
at work and I told
a bunch of people and
I was like, Oh my
goodness, you went to the
doctor today, I'm diabetic. I
got these needles, look at
my needles. And I was
just, I was young and
I was telling everyone all
about this and what a
fascinating and horrible thing it
was. And it, because it
was the thing in my
life. And a woman in
accounting pulled me aside, like
in a hushed tone, into
a, into an alleyway. And
she was like, don't talk
about this. What are you
doing? And I'm like, what
are you talking about? Like
I'm diabetic, but they don't
know because they're gonna, they're
gonna take away your insurance
and they're gonna, they might,
they might think you're weak
and they're not going to
want, they're not gonna give
you assignments because they know
that you've got this, this
thing. And she for about
two years taught me to
be consciously, visibly ashamed of
this thing that I just
thought was a thing. Like
I thought everyone has something
and it messed me up
for a pretty good amount
of time. But then when
I started doing speaking and
I would have, you know,
a low blood sugar or
have to fix my pumper,
stab a needle in myself
on stage, I'd have people
come up afterwards and say,
wow, it's so nice to
see a visible diabetic in
today's world. Is it good
to be a visible blank?
Whatever your thing is, like,
we've got supermodels with a
bit of lanugo and we
have international keynote speakers or
stutter, like everybody's got something.
Is that a good thing?
Oh yeah. I mean, of
course it is. I think
that, I think that the
more people who are a
little bit different, a little
bit outside of the box
who are, you know, like
out there doing a thing
that people don't think that
they can do because of,
you know, blank. I think
that that's a great thing.
I mean, I think that
we're telling kids, I think
that we're telling adults add
like, you know, all of
us are, you know, we
all have our own things,
right. We all have our
own insecurities, our own disabilities
and you don't have to
be quiet about those things.
Those things are actually kind
of a benefit to us
because they give us a
different perspective and they can
show the world a different
perspective. Right. I mean, it
also helps you to connect
with people who you didn't
think that you had anything
in common with than you,
you know, have some sort
of common ground. I mean,
I can't tell you, you
know, how many people have
like come up to me,
you know, when I've spoken
and said, yeah. You know,
I stutter too. And you
know, I have had a
really a challenging time, like
speaking up at work or,
you know, taking phone calls.
Like I just like constantly
avoid talking on the phone
and shit and, and seeing
you, you know, he on
stage and be confident and
be comfortable like that, you
know, just kids, me, it
gives me a feeling that
I can, you know, speak
with confidence and that it's
okay. And so, yes, you
know, of course I think,
I think that the more
that we make things in,
in visible, the more that
we give those things, how
power over us and over
our choices. And I think
that we should, you know,
do everything we can to
sort of take that power
back. Yeah. And let me
ask you this though. Like,
it feels like it takes
a lot of willpower. Like
I was, you know, every
couple of years, I'll be
honest with you. I will
have a crying day and
it's not all the time,
but it's just like every
couple of years, diabetes just
gets me down and like
the well of, of willpower
goes away and it's just
like, you know, I just
can't today and you just
want to break. Right. It's
been 27 years. And it's
just like, I need one
day where I can have
a freaking cookie and then
I've cried. I get over
it. And then I move
on. Not, not everyone has
a well of willpower that
is as deep as someone
else's. How do you teach
someone that like, well, they
might say, well, Sharon's, you
know, she's on stage, but
she's got that power. She's
got that. That's something that
I don't have. How do
we teach others to have
that ability as well? Right.
I mean, like, it's such
a small thing, right? Like
I just want a cookie
and now I'm crying about
it. However, I have those
exact same moments. I was
at a party a couple
of weeks ago. And so
people who stutter, like the
one word that we can't
get around is our name.
And so when we are
introducing ourselves, he can't say,
hi, well, I'm this awesome
person, blah, blah, blah. And
I do this and this
and that. No, it's like,
I have to say hi,
I'm, she's just, she's just,
she's just, she's just Sharon.
And like, occasionally it doesn't
come out as quickly as
it should. And so people
kind of give you this,
like, Oh, this is weird.
I'm either going to little,
a little, a little, a
little, a little, a little
look, half at you because
I'm uncomfortable or I'm just
going to completely avoid you
because I'm uncomfortable. And so
I was at this party
and we, you know, for
like going around and saying,
hi, you know, I'm smoking
so high I'm smoking. So,
and then I said, hi,
I'm , she's just Sharon
and a woman who I
was talking to just like,
was like, Oh, hi. And
then she just avoided me
for the entire night. And
I remember going up to
my husband and being like,
I want to leave. Like
I was so upset. I
was so overwhelmed with just
like, this is so embarrassing.
I'm so ashamed. Why do
like, I have to stutter?
Like, I just want to
be normal. Like, I just
want to go to a
party and say my name
and have fun and have
good conversations. And so, I
mean, I think that when,
you know, people see people,
you know, like you and
like I as strong and
confident all of the time,
well, they're only seeing a
very, very, very small part
of our lives, right? Like
on Twitter or on stages
or on these podcasts. Like
that's only like a very
small part of us, you
know, I have to be
this person. You, you, you
have to be this person
all day, every day. And
there are times when I
don't feel strong. Like there
are times when I'm just
not gonna call anyone because
I really don't feel like
having to talk to someone
right now because it's going
to be hard. And my
life is so hard and
I'm like, I'm just going
to stay in bed because
this is the worst. Right.
And so, I don't know.
I mean, I think that
people kind of view willpower
as strength, and I don't
see those things on the
same claim. I feel like
having we'll we'll we'll we'll
we'll we'll we'll, we'll, we'll,
we'll, we'll, we'll we'll Hauer
is, you know, kind of
peaks and valleys. It's like,
I have awesome days and
I feel confident and I
feel amazing and I feel
really, really, really, really strong
and tough. And then it's
on those days, then I
do feel weak and I
do feel small and I
choose to continue now to
continue pursuing a thing or,
you know, co on stage
anyway, or, or take that
call anyway, like that's willpower,
like that's like real true
strength. You know, I really
appreciate that you pointed that
out. I had not thought
about that before that I
think I primitively had thought
of willpower as being strength
and that I was weak.
If I didn't have it,
let's flip the idea that
willpower is not strength. There's
not a direct access there.
And flip that on its
head. And think about your,
your book and your reported
O'Reilly empathy at work. If
willpower is not strength, does
that mean that empathy is
not weakness? I mean, I
feel that, and that's a
great question. I know I
get a lot of people
who sort of come up
to me and say like,
well, like that touchy, feely
soft skill thing. Isn't really
all that important. And I
say, well, yeah. I mean,
well one, because like these
quote unquote soft skills, and
I absolutely despise that term.
Those are the only skills
that you are going to
consistently need throughout your career.
And then, you know, like
at, you know, your parents'
house or with your kids
or with your spouses or
with your friends, like these
are the things that sort
of like further relationships and,
you know, build scholar connections.
And so, you know, like
how can a thing, like,
it, it, him pithy, you
know, B equate it to
weakness when it's such a
powerful connector. And it helps
us to really like lay
the foundation for, you know,
pursuing, understanding other people's perspectives
and, and other people's opinions.
Like those things don't make
us weak and make us
header. They improve us as
people, they expand our minds
and all of those things
are going to help us,
you know, truly connect with
others. How can that possibly
be a weakness, Sick of
waiting for your CEI test
to pass or having to
manage different CII servers for
different teams using Buildkite. You
can run fast and reliable
CIA pipelines for every type
of project, whether it's backend
tests, mobile apps, or even
custom hardware build kites agent
helps you scale to thousands
of parallel jobs and your
secrets and source code never
leave your infrastructure. There's great
documentation, a clean web UI,
and plugins for different types
of tools visit Buildkite that's
K I T e.com/hanselman for
a 14 day free trial.
And see how Shopify has
scaled from 300 to 1500
engineers while keeping their build
times under five minutes, that's
built kite.com/hanselman. Is it something
that can be taught? We
take, we, we, my wife
and I are kind of
deep in the middle of
the tween years. My, I
have an 11 year old
and a 13 year old.
And you know, at this
moment in time, you know,
I love my kids, but
they're just jerks. Just, just
awful, awful little people, you
know, because they have zero
empathy of any kind. And
I'm, you know, in your
book, you actually call out
three types of empathy, emotional
empathy, cognitive empathy, and empathetic
concern. They effectively have none
of these things, except maybe
they can manipulate us using
empathy as like a tool.
What we're looking for them
to really have is primarily
cognitive empathy, which you say
is perspective taking. And unfortunately,
as you point out in
your report, that's the kind
of empathy it requires work
and, and little boys don't
like to work. Yeah, no,
I mean, the research shows
that like a lot of
these things that we're talking
about, you know, now, like
aren't just in parent and
if you think about it,
you know, like we're sort
of, of generically, like we
are protectors of, you know,
ourselves and our tribes. And
so then we are faced
with an outsider. We are
not like attempting to like,
understand them. It's almost like
a fight or flight sort
of reaction. Right? And so
like, this is a skill
that, you know, the vast
majority of us that have
to squirt of learn as
we go. And we have
to sort of like take
the time to really cause
and to really think about,
you know, like where other
people are coming from and,
and fill in the gap,
fill in the gaps of
the things that we don't
know, or, or you just
kind of have to accept
like that. We don't have
all of the context and,
you know, have to assume
that other people are coming
from a good place. All
of those things are not
things that are in parents
in us. And so it
does require some trial and
error and a whole lot
of work on The, I
never really thought about the
idea that it isn't intuitive
to some folks because it
may be evolutionarily, not a
beneficial thing. Like it depends
on the world you live
in, if you are in
a cave and your focus
is the three people in
your space, then yeah. You
should be empathetic towards those
three people and everyone else's
an enemy, but in a,
in a connected global world,
it's actually quite useful to
do. And certainly when a
world of social media being
empathetic towards people is only
a good thing. Oh, for
sure. I mean, especially now
when we're, you know, constantly
bombarded with, you know, like
all kinds of news and
all kinds of contents and
all kinds of opinions, a
lot of those opinions, they're
just like, I don't agree
with that. How am I
supposed to, you know, like,
he'll like what these feelings,
I mean, I feel like
we've gotten to a point
where like, if we're confronted
that the person who liked
hasn't agreed with us on,
you know, like a few
obvious topics, then we just
don't want to talk to
them at all. And that
is the complete opposite of,
you know, trying to pursue
understanding and like trying to
get perspective. We live in
a world that makes it
empathy incredibly typical. And so,
you know, like we have
to work quite a bit
harder in order to achieve
our goals of like truly
connecting with people. Especially if
we disagree with them, The
I'm hoping that the boys
are gonna learn empathy on
their own, but I'm going
to keep trying to explain
it to them. I don't
think having them read your
research papers is going to
work for an 11 year
old, but I'm going to
do the PA. We may
assign this as homework. In
fact, I think that's a
great idea. I mean, why
not? You know, you might
as well get them started
young. I'm sure they would
love that. Well, you call
it out, right? It's learned
it's not, it's not innate,
like some empathy is built
into our brains, but the
most of it is how
we're learning that it's difficult
if you've been, if you've
had a tough life and
your life in life has
beaten you up, I'm sure
that would probably beat the
empathy out of you Or,
I mean, like it could
do the I'm entirely, you
know, opposite thing and, and
force you to be incredibly
empathetic. I mean, I know
people who stutter, who kind
of view fluent people as
like, wow, you know, like
your life is so easy.
How can you ever be
uncomfortable talking on the phone?
uncomfortable getting up on stage?
And I'm like, you guys
hold on. Like these things
that we're doing like me,
every time I get on
stage, I'm not just concerned
about stuttering. You know, I'm
concerned about the content I
am delivering, right? Like, I
mean, every time like I
have to hop on like
a conference call, you know,
I'm, you know, of course
concerned about stuttering, but I'm
also concerned about, you know,
kitting across my point and
convincing clients that, you know,
like the thing that God
I want to do for
the company, you know, is
going to work for them.
And so, I mean, I
think it depends on, you
know, who that person is
either. They're going to be
like, wow, your life is
really easy and you don't
have any problems or it's
going to force them to
sort of take a step
and say like, Hey, like
I kind of understand, you
know, how you could feel
that, you know, like this
is an uncomfortable situation and,
you know, I can empathize
with that. Yeah. I think
one of the important things
is that, and I always
encourage people to try to
avoid playing the oppression Olympics.
This is not a point
based system. That's a great
term. I'm going to use
it. Yeah. I mean, okay.
So like I have type
one diabetes. Okay. So what
you're right. I got all
this. Yeah, exactly. Well, you
know, but here's the thing,
right. But we are in
a, in a country that
can support us. We are
in a time that can
support us. I mean, you
want to talk about who
would be a lousy caveman.
Right. I got it. I
got LASIK. I would be
the blind, diabetic eating lettuce
in the back of the
cave, you know, That's so
true. We're very lucky. And
I think that empathy is
also applying these things to
yourself. Like everybody's got something
and what a wonderful time
it is that we can,
we can all just survive
together. One thing that you,
you said there, I had
that heard that to him,
you called us the fluent.
I've called people. The normally
sugared or just the normals,
you know, someone at work
is like, can you eat
that cake? And it's just
like, Oh, you're normals. Yeah.
You can get off my
lawn. Exactly. I know that
there are people that, for
example, in the, in the
deaf and hard of hearing
community who have some kind
of feeling about someone who
might get a cochlear implant,
are there things in the
stuttering community that can, I've
heard about hearing AIDS that
talk back into your ear?
Is there a push a
button and fix it option
and is that considered a
good thing or a bad
thing? Well, so I know
that there are the hearing
AIDS, and I know that
those, you know, do work
for some people. However, I've
heard that, like after a
certain time period, like they
stopped working. But other than
that, I haven't heard that
there's any cure for it.
And I think that people
are like trying to find
a cure. I was actually
seeing a therapist who said
that he helped, you know,
one of his clients cure
stuttering by like complete accident.
And he did it by
putting him on some sort
of like anti-anxiety pills. And
then the client was also
smoking a lot of pedicle
marijuana. And so that combination
actually cured stuttering for him.
Now the therapist is like,
look, I don't suggest going
out and getting a lot
of weed and smoking it.
But I'm just saying, there's
a way that we could
help you stutter less. And
those are the side effects
though. I mean, who knows.
Yeah, exactly. Even now. But
I mean, I think that,
I think that the community
is kind of split. I
mean, so you have this
conference it's called the national
stuttering association conference and it's
every year around the 4th of July.
And so like a lot
of the people that stutter,
like they kind of come
from all over the world
to sort of just connect
and to go to different
art shops and hear talks
and you know, like all
of that stuff. And so
there are people there who
say like, I would take
a pill and then I
would have a go away.
And then there's a lot
of other people there who
are like, I would never
take a pill because stuttering
is the best thing that's
ever happened to me. Now
I'm a person who could
probably say that this is
the best thing that's ever
happened to me. But if
I could take a pill
to maybe like, not stutter,
like 98% of the time,
I would consider taking that
pill. I mean, I just
think it makes my life
day to day, life way
easier. However, I mean, I
kind of like, can't imagine
me personally, like my life
about stuttering. I mean, I
don't know where I would
be. So it depends on
who you talk to. Some
people are like, I'm going
to start it for life.
And others are like, just
give me the pill, give
me the pill. We, we
always talk about this in
the diabetes community. Like if
they cure me tomorrow, I
would still be pricking my
fingers and checking my blood
sugar because I would not
believe it was true. So
I would be diabetic at
heart. I would eat cookies.
And then I would just
check my blood sugar and
be like, that's amazing. Let,
let you, it's been perfect
for like all this time.
So w w you have
a company called communal log
and you do basically empathy
can such an empathy consultancy.
Are you giving workshops and
traveling around to, to companies,
people can hire you to
talk about these things. Yeah.
Yeah. So I began as
a speaker. And so, you
know, I was talking about,
you know, improving communication with
empathy, and then it kind
of just shifted into like
going into companies and working
with either their teams or,
or doing like breakouts at
their like internal company events,
like where we sort of
had these discussions around, like
how to engage empathy at
work in an impactful way.
And so I work with
companies on sort of improving
communication collaboration, you know, through
oppor, rationalizing empathy on their
teams and in their apartments
and in their organizations as
a whole. And so the
breakouts I do are between
us 60 minutes and three
hours. And so we try
to get a lot done.
And I think that the
thing that I've learned the
most, I mean, so I
am coming from like a,
a speaker keynote sort of
background. And so, you know,
I only have like 30
minutes, 45 minutes had liked
doing these workshops. You know,
I didn't realize just how
has separately people and, you
know, companies and in the
corporate space are just tying
to like, have conversations around
it, empathy and insecurities and
vulnerability. I mean, you know,
your employees want to talk
about these things. And so
I'm the person that companies
bring in to sort of
create the space to have
those conversations. The thing that
I thought was the most
powerful, or kind of surprising
about what you just said
was you said opera up,
it's hard to say for
anybody to give me No.
If I made that word
up or It's pretty awesome
operationalizing empathy, because you're not
just coming in and saying,
Hey, let's talk about squishy
things. You're saying let's optimize
business outcomes. And like being
pleasant and facilitating conversations around
empathy, it can actually help
your business. Shocker, shocker. I
know, right. A lot of
people like don't believe in
it are just like, well,
how is this going to
help my business? Well, do
you want your teams to
collaborate more? He wants your
teams to be more productive
while they're not going to
be highly collaborative or productive
if they don't get along
well. Or even if they
like completely can't stand each
other, like they have to
respect each other. And it,
empathy, you know, is going
to increase all of those
things. And it's just going
to help collaboration, communication, all
of those good things. It's
just going to help it
just go much smoother. Have
you ever come into a
company and presented this information
to them? And they just
sit there with their arms
crossed and then just storm
out at the end. And
they're like, yeah. Okay. I
just did this workshop. So
it actually happened one time
and it wasn't at a
company. It was at a
conference. And so I have
to give you just like
a little bit of background
on this. So it was
the first time I had
given any sort of content
like this. It was all
day and it was in
Stonier. So every possible carrier
I could have to succeeding.
I had it. And long
story short here did not
go well at all. And
I remember calling one of
my other consultant, friends and
being like, I can't do
this. Like, I'm not good
at this. I'm just going
to stick to keynotes. And
she was like, okay, look,
calm down. Like, let's talk
about like who you are,
like, what you bring to
the table and kinda like
what you, who well, and
it turns out, you know,
all of the answers to
those questions are all of
the things that I did
not do when I was
giving this like full day
workshop to a culture that's
completely different from mine. And
so, yeah. I mean, like
after that first time of,
you know, learning like, look
like I'm not going to,
you know, tell you anything
that like, you don't already
know, all right. Like I
am here to, you know,
create the space for conversations.
I'm not here to teach
you anything. Like, I want
you guys to be able
to solve your own problems.
I'm not the problem solver.
I'm just the vehicle. And
so after I got that
down, yeah, kinda, it was
fine. It was great actually.
But that first time, man,
let me tell you that
was, that was rough. It
was a rough day and
couple of weeks after That,
actually that actually hits me
pretty hard cause I'm supposed
to be in Estonia next
week. So now I'm going
to have to get some
real, No, it'll be fine.
You'll be fine. It was
just me. I was just
wholly unprepared for every single
thing that I was walking
into. I think it's really
cool that you are conscious
of that because stoning is
great. And your empathy now
has to go two ways
because you have to put
yourself in their heads and,
and you probably learned a
lot and you're a better
speaker for Oh, absolutely. 1000%.
Well, thank you so much,
Sharon Steed, empathy and inclusion,
expert and CEO at communal
log for chatting with me
today. Of course. Thank you.
It was an incredible conversation
and I'm so happy. I
was finally able to get
to talk to you online
and not just talk to
you through words on a
page. Fantastic. Thanks so much.
I'll make sure to put
all the details and how
you can get ahold of
Sharon and have her speak
at your company in the
show notes. Again, her company
is called Camina log. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.